{\rtf1\ansi\deff0
{\fonttbl{\f0 Calibri;}}
\fs24
\b Background Removal Using Segmentation - Project Documentation\b0\par
\par
\b Student Name:\b0 Huzaif\par
\b Date:\b0 May 6, 2026\par
\b Project Type:\b0 Advanced Computer Vision - Background Removal\par
\par
\b 1. Abstract\b0\par
This project performs background removal from images using a segmentation-based pipeline and provides a simple local web interface. The system accepts an input image, removes the background, and returns either a transparent PNG output or a white-background output.\par
\par
\b 2. Objectives\b0\par
- Build a reliable background removal system.\par
- Provide an easy-to-use web interface for non-technical users.\par
- Ensure outputs are high quality on laptop hardware.\par
\par
\b 3. Tools and Technologies\b0\par
- Python 3.x\par
- Gradio (web UI)\par
- rembg (segmentation and background removal)\par
- onnxruntime (model runtime backend)\par
- Pillow, NumPy\par
\par
\b 4. Project Workflow\b0\par
1) User uploads an image in the web UI.\par
2) The system runs segmentation to produce an alpha matte.\par
3) The output is composed with either transparent or white background.\par
4) The processed image is returned in the UI for download.\par
\par
\b 5. Project Structure\b0\par
- app.py: Gradio UI entry point\par
- src\\inference.py: Background removal logic\par
- scripts\\download_model.py: Pre-download model weights\par
- requirements.txt: Dependencies\par
- assets\\: Optional sample data\par
- outputs\\: Optional saved results\par
\par
\b 6. Installation Steps (Windows)\b0\par
1) Create and activate a virtual environment.\par
2) Install dependencies:\par
   python -m pip install -r requirements.txt\par
\par
\b 7. How to Run\b0\par
- Start the app:\par
  python app.py\par
- Optional: Pre-download model weights:\par
  python scripts\\download_model.py\par
\par
\b 8. Output and Results\b0\par
The project generates background-removed images with clean edges for typical photos. Output can be transparent PNG or white background images depending on user selection.\par
\par
\b 9. Screenshots and Evidence\b0\par
Screenshots are available in the following folder:\par
C:\\Users\\ASUS\\OneDrive\\Documents\\Pictures\\Screenshots\par
(Images include UI view, input image, and output results.)\par
\par
\b 10. Challenges and Fixes\b0\par
- Python environment mismatch was resolved by using a virtual environment.\par
- Missing dependencies were resolved by updating requirements and reinstalling.\par
\par
\b 11. Future Improvements\b0\par
- Batch image processing\par
- Custom background replacement\par
- Edge refinement and feathering controls\par
- API endpoint for integration\par
\par
\b 12. Conclusion\b0\par
The system successfully removes image backgrounds using segmentation, provides a simple UI, and runs efficiently on laptop hardware. The project meets the documentation requirements with clear workflow, code structure, and output evidence.\par
}
